#An empirical analysis of rates of violence and climate change in African countries
##Isaac Menninga, November 2015

Introduction:
	Recent research has been aimed at determining the relationship 
between climate change and conflict. This research is conducted with the 
assumption that resource scarcity, and otherwise extreme conditions have 
a strong influence on the occurrence of conflict. However, determining 
the causes of conflict is a difficult task. The extent to which 
different factors (income inequality, social welfare, severe weather, 
crop yield, etc) affect conflict outcomes is not well understood, and is 
largely based on speculation (Barnett and Adger). However, climate 
change will likely have an effect on rates of violence and conflict, 
particularly in developing countries which lack disaster and crisis 
management infrastructure. 
This study will examine data on conflict and violence in African 
countries as well as regional rainfall, temperature, crop yield and 
weather. By examining empirical evidence, rather than speculating, this 
study hopes to gain additional insight into how climate change will 
affect stability in developing countries (Nordas and Gleditsch). Given 
the findings of previous studies, I predict there will be a correlation 
between extreme climate and conflict. 

Methods:
	This study will look at data about precipitation, temperature, 
and weather to examine the different regional effects of climate change 
over time. The focus of the study will be on African countries which 
have been identified as particularly at risk from climate change 
(countries in semi-arid and equatorial zones). This data will be 
analyzed together with data on conflict events in those countries. This 
study is mostly exploration driven, that is the methods of analysis will 
change significantly based on the visualization of the data. An approach 
of this type is effective in this context, because of the uncertainty of 
conflict analysis, and that the extent that climate change and conflict 
are correlated is unknown. 

Significance:
	Findings from this study could impact the way climate change is 
discussed at an international level. Most studies on climate change 
focus on the effects on wealthy nations, as those countries have many 
research institutions domestically. However, developing countries will 
likely suffer the most from changes in climate, because of the lack of 
robust adaptation mechanisms. Additionally, if an economy relies on 
agriculture for a majority of its economic activity, reduction in crop 
yield due to climate change could severely harm the wellbeing of 
individuals in that economy (Hendrix). Once the effects of climate 
change on these countries is better understood, research should be 
directed at how to increase the ability of poorer countries to adapt. 

References:
Barnett, Jon, and W. Neil Adger. Climate Change, Human Security and 
Violent Conflict. Political Geography 26.6 (2007): 639655. 
ScienceDirect. Web. 2 Nov. 2015. Climate Change and Conflict.

Hendrix, Cullen S., and Idean Salehyan. Climate Change, Rainfall, and 
Social Conflict in Africa. Journal of Peace Research 49.1 (2012): 3550. 
jpr.sagepub.com. Web. 2 Nov. 2015.

Nordas, Ragnhild, and Nils Petter Gleditsch. Climate Change and 
Conflict. Political Geography 26.6 (2007): 627638. ScienceDirect. Web. 2 
Nov. 2015. Climate Change and Conflict.

